#summary Instinct Overview
#labels Featured

= Introduction =

Instinct is a Behaviour Driven Development (BDD) framework for Java. Inspired by RSpec, Instinct provides flexible annotation of contexts, specifications and actors; automatic creation of test doubles and test subjects; a state and
behaviour expectation API; JUnit test runner integration; Ant support and an IntelliJ IDEA plugin.

Instinct is primarily designed to support developers as they are developing code, as an integral part of the act of programming. Instinct specifications also serve as a means of critiquing production code, in a similar manner to more traditional testing frameworks such as JUnit or TestNG.

So how do I get started?

  * [http://code.google.com/p/instinct/downloads/list Download it]
  * [Tutorials Read the tutorials]
  * [InstinctIn2Minutes Use it!]
  * Contribute?

Can I read more?

  * [http://adams.id.au/blog/wp-content/uploads/2007/10/OSDC2007BetterTestingThroughBehaviour.pdf Better Testing Through Behaviour], OSDC 2007
  * [http://dannorth.net/introducing-bdd/ Introducing Behaviour-Driven Development]
  * [http://blog.daveastels.com/files/BDD_Intro.pdf A New Look at Test Driven Development]

Hear people talk about it?

  * [http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=8135690990081075324 Dave Astel's Beyond Test Driven Development Google Talk]
  * [http://www.infoq.com/interviews/Dave-Astels-and-Steven-Baker Dave Astels and Steven Baker on RSpec and Behavior-Driven Development at InfoQ]

Find more information?

  * [http://behaviour-driven.org/ BDD main page]
  * [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Behavior_driven_development BDD on Wikipedia]