#summary Instinct user's guide
#labels Featured,Tutorial

*Note. These details are applicable to Instinct 0.1.6 only, currently available in [http://code.google.com/p/instinct/source SVN].*

= Topics =

  * Introduction
  * [InstinctIn2Minutes Two minute introduction]
  * [Getting started]
  * [Specifications Creating specifications]
  * [Expectations State and behavioural expectations]
  * [Actors Creating and using specification actors]
  * [JUnitIntegration Integrating with JUnit]
  * [AntIntegration Integrating with Ant]
  * [CloverIntegration Integrating with Clover]
  * [Terminology]

= Introduction =

Instinct is a Behaviour Driven Development (BDD) framework for Java. Inspired by RSpec, Instinct provides flexible annotation of contexts, specifications and actors; automatic creation of test doubles and test subjects; a state and
behaviour expectation API; JUnit test runner integration; Ant support and an IntelliJ IDEA plugin.

Instinct is primarily designed to support developers as they are developing code, as an integral part of the act of programming. Instinct specifications also serve as a means of critiquing production code, in a similar manner to more traditional testing frameworks such as JUnit or TestNG.

So how do I get started?

  * [http://code.google.com/p/instinct/downloads/list Download it]
  * [InstinctIn2Minutes Use it!]
  * [http://groups.google.com/group/instinct-dev Contribute?]

Can I read more?

  * [http://adams.id.au/blog/wp-content/uploads/2007/10/OSDC2007BetterTestingThroughBehaviour.pdf Better Testing Through Behaviour], Tom Adams, [http://osdc.com.au/ OSDC 2007] ([http://adams.id.au/blog/wp-content/uploads/2007/10/OSDC2007BetterTestingThroughBehaviourPresentation.pdf slides]).
  * [http://dannorth.net/introducing-bdd/ Introducing Behaviour-Driven Development], Dan North.
  * [http://blog.daveastels.com/files/BDD_Intro.pdf A New Look at Test Driven Development], Dave Astels.
  * [http://www.agiledenver.org/2007AprMeeting.php Behavior Driven Development: An Evolution in Testing], Bob Cotton, Agile Denver, April 2007.

See/hear people talk about it?

  * [http://rubyconf2007.confreaks.com/d3t1p2_rspec.html Behaviour Driven Development in Ruby with RSpec], Dave Astels & David Chelimsky, [http://rubyconf.org/ RubyConf 2007] ([http://blog.davidchelimsky.net/files/BDDWithRspec.RubyConf.2007.pdf slides]).
  * [http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=8135690990081075324 Dave Astel's Beyond Test Driven Development Google Talk]
  * [http://www.infoq.com/interviews/Dave-Astels-and-Steven-Baker Dave Astels and Steven Baker on RSpec and Behavior-Driven Development at InfoQ]

Find more information?

  * [http://behaviour-driven.org/ BDD main page]
  * [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Behavior_driven_development BDD on Wikipedia]

= Colophon =

This user's guide gives an introduction to Instinct. The examples for this tutorial come from the [http://instinct.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/example/ example project] (also available from the [http://code.google.com/p/instinct/downloads/list downloads page]), full details and examples of all Instinct features are available there. The tutorial assumes you have [http://code.google.com/p/instinct/downloads/list downloaded] Instinct. Details on terminology used are available on the [Terminology terminology page].